diplomatic meetings are underway across
the middle east in an effort to
deescalate Rising Regional tension
Jordan's foreign minister has made a
rare visit to Iran where talks have also
taken place with representatives from
Egypt Oman and Qatar the US and its
allies are urging all parties to prevent
a wider escalation of the conflict
following the assassination of the Hamas
leader Ismael hania in tan now Iran has
vowed to punish Israel for that killing
but its foreign Ministry said say it is
not looking to escalate tensions that's
according to the reuter news
agency well as Hamas considers its
leadership options following the killing
of its political leader Ismael hania
attention now turns to the Palestinian
militant group's chief on the ground in
Gaza Yahya Sina is the man Israel
believes orchestrated the October 7
Terror attacks it's been pursuing him
ever since and has vowed to kill him
Sina is hamas's top boss in Gaza born in
the Kan yunus refugee camp he has been
with the militant group since its
Beginnings in the late 1980s around the
time of the first inada or Palestinian
Uprising against Israeli
occupation back then he led a security
network which Tracked Down Palestinians
accused of collaborating with
Israel sinoa was jailed by Israel in
1988 for planning the abduction and
murder of two Israeli soldiers and the
murder of four
Palestinians he was locked up for 23
years eventually released in 2011 he was
one of more than 1,000 Palestinian
prisoners exchanged for one Israeli
soldier having served as a commander of
hamas's military Wing sinoa was elected
as the group's Gaza leader in 20
17 he issued this threat while speaking
to crowds in Gaza in December
2022 we will come to you God willing in
a roaring
flood we will come to you with an
endless number of
rockets we will come to you in a flood
of soldiers without limit we will come
to you with millions of our nation tide
after tide
Israel accuses sinir of being the chief
planner of the October 7th Terror
attacks which killed 1,200 people and
took more than 250 others hostage in
Gaza the one who decided on this
despicable attack was yaka ala The
Sovereign of the Gaza Strip therefore
him and the whole system under him are
as good as dead we will attack them we
will dismantle them we will dismantle
their
[Music]
system Israeli forces have hunted him
relentlessly targeting gaza's
underground tunnel Network where he is
believed to be hiding from Israel's
attacks which have killed tens of
thousands of
Palestinians let's find out more about
this man Matthew levit has written
several books about Hamas and Hezbollah
he's director of the counterterrorism
program at the Washington Institute for
NE East policy welcome to
DW Israel apparently has no problem
targeting Ismael hania in a highly
secured building in tan so why has it
been unable to get Yahya sinoa in
Gaza y senoir has been hiding in Tunnels
for 10 months Israelis claimed that in
at least three instances they nearly
caught him and released a video
of uh the room in which he was hiding in
his tunnels the safe in which he was
hiding money Etc but there are hundreds
of kilometers of tunnels in Gaza um
they're interconnected like spiderwebs
and it's very very difficult uh to
penetrate them uh with the kind of
eavesdropping material that might lead
to his capture especially when he is
likely being very very careful about the
use of cell phones and the
like so how has the heing of is Han
affected Yahya sina's role in
Hamas not very much at all yehia senoir
is the overall Hamas leader in the Gaza
Strip he has been and continues to be
the only person whose opinion matters on
things like a ceasefire and release of
hostages in return for Palestinian
prisoners Etc is Han is the overall
Hamas uh leader until he was killed but
that was really more technical than
reality uh hania and sinir had a
significant amount of tension between
them hania was the overall head of Hamas
located in the Gaza Strip as senoir was
actually the head of Hamas in the Gaza
Strip that led to tension and ultimately
Hanah left Gaza and that's why we found
him splitting his time between Qatar and
turkey he was very close to to Iran
which puts Iran in this position not
only because uncomfortable position not
only because Han was killed inan as he
was there for the inauguration of the
new president in an irgc safe house but
because within two days Iran lost key
interlocutors one from Hamas and one
from Hezbollah who were key
interlocutors with Iran and that and and
of itself sent a significant message I
found it striking that sinan was born in
the KH Unice refugee camp we tend to
think of refugee camps as temporary
structures constructed during crisis and
then dismantled when they're no longer
Le needed but the canis Camp has been
there for decades and it would be hard
to design a more perfect breeding ground
to encourage generations of people to
Harbor resentment towards
Israel it's true the refugee camps in
the Gaza ship have been there for a very
long time uh part of that is because
Palestinian organizations have refused
to relocate Palestinians into permanent
housing before there was a final
resolution to the Israeli Palestinian
conflict there's this tension between
creating a better situation for your own
people on the ground and losing leverage
uh of the idea of refugees uh in the
overall effort between Israel and the
Palestinians now the vast majority of
people who live in these camps are not
actually radicalized to violence which
suggests that as bad as the situation is
these are not the worst kind of places
for radicalizing people very small
numbers actually ended up radicalizing
to Hamas in fact the poll that our Think
Tank took in July before the October 7th
attacks demonstrated that over
70% of gazin were fed up with Hamas
wanted Hamas disarmed and did not
support Hamas targeting
Israel we've seen as you said a a number
of Hezbollah and and Hamas um officials
targeted and and dispatched in the the
last uh couple of weeks is it as simple
as saying that the war in Gaza would end
if Israelis were able uh to catch
SWA I don't think it's quite that simple
um the people who would succeed him uh
in particular his brother uh would still
have to make the decision to release
hostages and agree to um a a a ceasefire
or a pause I do think that uh removing
yoir from the equation would go a long
way towards making that possible because
he's very very widely seen as the
hardest line person in this entire um
calculation uh when you take out someone
like a Hanah inan or if were to happen a
sinir in Gaza that's going to make some
within Hamas harder line at least in the
moment but there's enough of uh um
momentum there are enough reasons why
Hamas itself will want a ceasefire so
that that won't completely torpedo the
negotiations and I don't think the
assassination of hania will torpedo the
negotiations thank you for that um very
interesting Matthew levit from the
Washington Institute for neares
policy as Israel braces for possible
retaliation from Iran and Hezbollah the
families of the 115 remaining hostages
in Gaza fear that the escalation will
make a ceasefire deal even more elusive
indirect negotiation between Hamas and
Israel have so far been unsuccessful and
the threat of a wider conflict in the
region appears to only be growing by the
day it is not easy for Dan algarad to
walk here in Tel aviv's hostage
Square for 10 months he has been
campaigning for the release of his
brother iik who was kidnapped by Hamas
from kibuts near Oz on October 7 but now
as a crisis unfolds with Iran and
Hezbollah a ceasefire and hostage de
seem more elusive than
ever I think these people deserve to die
we need to eliminate
them the question is when and whether
they're more important than the lives of
the
hostages that's the
question after the targeted killings of
Hamas leader is Han in Teran and f
shukri a senior hisbah figure in Beirut
Israel is now praised for retaliation
and possible
escalation 115 hostages are still
believed to be held in Gaza some of whom
are no longer alive people here in Tel
Aviv are extremely worried about the
fate of the hostages still being held in
Gaza fearing an allout war with Iran and
Hezbollah people here are more on edge
than ever life goes on as usual here at
least for now but the threat of an
imminent escalation is is on everyone's
mind it's very worrying things are
unclear there is a lack of
information we don't know what is going
to happen we are terribly worried about
our people over there there is no one
who is leading us responsibly it's a
difficult feeling it's not easy to be a
citizen in Israel
today for me it was already scary after
7th of
October uh and uh I was really scared
because I wasn't like sure what's going
to be tomorrow or the day after tomorrow
but uh eventually like um um I'm sure
that everything is going to be okay no
matter what and trying to stay calm yeah
but it's a bit scary cuz you don't know
what to expect Danny El garat is
critical of netanyahu's strategy of
Maximum military pressure and thinks
he's motivated by his desire to stay in
power we see the condition the state is
in today the country's condition is much
worse than on October 7th we're on the
worch of a regional
war in the face of growing uncertainty
the hostages families are waiting
anxiously for their loved ones to come
home as the country prepares for
whatever comes
next Colin Clark is director of research
at the sufan group that's a global
consultancy focused on counterterrorism
and International Security it's good to
have you on the program Mr Clark do we
know how has Yaya senoir managed to
survive 10 months of war in
Gaza yeah well this is something that
senoir was uh long preparing for
obviously and if you look at uh the the
density and the complexity of what's
really a Labyrinth of underground
tunnels almost a city onto itself uh
he's had a long time to prepare this is
someone that knows the Israelis uh
better than probably most uh Palestinian
militants uh and he's also likely
avoided the use of any technology
anything that emits uh some kind of a
signal uh as well as keeping very kind
of uh you know close company and is
likely also uh you know using couriers
to transmit messages yeah Courier so no
technology that would allow him to be
traced if that's the case if he's hiding
deep in a tunnel how then how is he able
to effectively communicate with Hamas
outside of Gaza and and hold basically
the Reigns of
power well he's got the street cred or
credibility right to kind of be uh
firmly entrenched and I think you know
most people that are speculating on who
succeeds is hania uh it may not make
that much of a difference politically
because uh sinir is really the kind of
uh the muscle now uh and you know that's
why we've seen in all the the kind of
ceasefire negotiations and potential
hostage deals uh the delay in a response
right negotiations taking place across
the gulf and there's been this kind of
delayed response because it takes a
while to get the messages to senoir then
it takes a while to get the messages
from senoir Back to the uh mediators in
Qatar Egypt uh Israel the United States
and elsewhere if symar is is not
captured or is not killed will Israel
ever be able to declare victory over
Hamas well the Israelis could declare
Victory today they've killed many of the
leading militants of this group not only
uh individuals like Muhammad Dave who
they had long sought much in the same
vein as uh senoir but they've killed
some of the group's top political
leaders uh you know alori in Lebanon
back in January Maran Isa uh and now
most recently uh SM hania and so uh if
they wanted to they could stop and and
declare Victory I don't think that's
something that's likely though uh if
they were able to get senoir Andor his
brother that might be added incentive uh
but only time will tell a few weeks ago
the Wall Street Journal published leaked
messages sinmir had sent to other Hamas
leaders in which he basically said The
more Palestinians die in Gaza the better
for Hamas um has this been his policy
all along
yeah very likely he's willing to fight
the Israelis uh until the last
Palestinian civilian it shows you how
diabolical uh you know of of an
individual he is this is somebody that
you know uh values martyrdom right
exactly what they say and is not uh
afraid to sacrifice Palestinians to
achieve his goals of of maintaining
power you know I will say in some ways
people have made similar accusations
about Netanyahu on the other side is
that he's willing to continue
sacrificing innocent lives to maintain
his grip on power so you have two
stubborn Leaders with their own agenda
that may not necessarily be looking out
for the best interests of their
Collective people C terrorism expert
Colin Clark Mr Clark we appreciate your
time and your valuable insights tonight
thank you